## Introduction

This repository contains a [CQL](https://cql.hl7.org/) engine that uses [a fork](https://github.com/umg-minai/clinical_quality_language) of the [CQL reference implementation](https://github.com/cqframework/clinical_quality_language) and works with clinical data in databases which conform to the [OMOP Common Data Model](https://www.ohdsi.org/data-standardization/).
Some of the code in this repository has been generated by the [cql-on-omop code generator](https://github.com/umg-minai/cql-on-omop-code-generator).
The content of the repository is provided under the Apache 2.0 license (see `COPYING` file).

The code in this repository can be compiled into a standalone Java application which usually connects to an OMOP database and supports multiple interfaces for controlling the CQL processing:

* An interactive Read Eval Print Loop (REPL) which reads CQL definitions and expressions from an interactive prompt, evaluates the CQL expressions and displays the results.
  This mode can be used without a database connection to perform simple evaluations.

* Non-interactive batch processing of CQL libraries.
  Results can be handled in different ways.
  Some possibilities are

  * Results are printed to the standard output stream

  * Results are written into one or more CSV files

  * Results are written to the OMOP database or to a different OMOP database

* Terminology analysis which reads CQL libraries and outputs a JSON array which lists and describes the referenced OMOP concepts.
  This mode can be used without a database connection.
  If a database connection is configured and the selected OMOP database contains the relevant terminology data, the returned data can be augmented with concept names, concept domains and concept ancestors can be looked up and collected.

## Usage

Since this project is currently using [a fork](https://github.com/umg-minai/clinical_quality_language) of the [CQL reference implementation](https://github.com/cqframework/clinical_quality_language), the Maven Central registry cannot be used to obtain the required artifacts.
The forked repository contains a Maven package registry with pre-built Maven artifacts of the forked CQL engine, but unfortunately, such package registries cannot be made publicly accessible.
As a result, this project has to be built by first building the CQL engine. All required steps can be performed as follows:

1. `git clone https://github.com/umg-minai/clinical_quality_language`

2. `pushd . && cd clinical_quality_language/Src/java`

3. `./gradlew publishToMavenLocal`

4. `popd`

5. `git clone https://github.com/umg-minai/cql-on-omop`

6. `cd cql-on-omop`

7. `mvn package`

Successful compilation produces a standalone application in a file like `target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar`.

### Interactive REPL

To start the REPL and connect to a database

```bash
CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
  repl -h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME [-s DATABASE-SCHEMA]
```

The default `DATABASE-SCHEMA` is `cds_cdm`.

Within the REPL, evaluate CQL expressions:

```
[0] [VisitOccurrence]
E1 => List<VisitOccurrence>
  VisitOccurrence{id=30518, concept='Inpatient Visit'}
  VisitOccurrence{id=30519, concept='Inpatient Visit'}
  VisitOccurrence{id=30520, concept='Intensive Care'}
  ...
```

#### Non-CQL Commands

The REPL supports several commands that provide functionality outside the scope of CQL.
Syntactically, these commands start with a `,` to distinguish them from valid CQL expressions.
The most important non-CQL commands are

* `,focus CQL-EXPRESSION`

  This command causes `CQL-EXPRESSION` to be evaluated and the resulting value, typically a list of `Person` instances or a single such instance, to be installed as the current context object or as multiple context objects (see below).

* `,reload`

  This command causes all CQL libraries that have been included via `include …` lines to be re-loaded from the filesystem.
  This command is useful for developing and testing CQL libraries with a long-lived REPL session.

#### Current Context and Context Objects

CQL provides the syntax `context CONTEXT-NAME` to select one of the contexts provided by the current data model as the current context.
At the moment, `cql-on-omop` supports the contexts `Unfiltered` and `Patient`.
CQL does not specify how the value (or the values) for a context is determined or installed.
To this end, `cql-on-omop` provides the `,focus` non-CQL command to establish the connection between the current context and its value or values.

For example,

```
,focus [Person]
context Patient
```

results in a state in which each `Person` instance that is produced by the `[Person]` retrieve expression is one value of the `Patient` context.
**Any CQL expression evaluated after the above snippets will be evaluated for each context value (in this case, each `Person` instance) individually. The results of these individual evaluations will be presented as multiple sections labeled by context value (i.e. `Person` instances) which show the respective computed value**:

```
[1] ,focus [Person]
Focussing on Person{id=0}, Person{id=1}, Person{id=2}, Person{id=3}, Person{id=4}, Person{id=5}, Person{id=6}, Person{id=7}, Person{id=8}, Person{id=9},
[2] context Patient
[3] Count([ConditionOccurrence])
Person{id=5}
E1 => Integer 2
Person{id=3}
E1 => Integer 8
Person{id=6}
E1 => Integer 3
Person{id=8}
E1 => Integer 3
Person{id=9}
E1 => Integer 1
Person{id=7}
E1 => Integer 3
Person{id=1}
E1 => Integer 6
Person{id=0}
E1 => Integer 8
Person{id=2}
E1 => Integer 5
Person{id=4}
E1 => Integer 5
```

### Batch Evaluation

To non-interactively evaluate the definitions in a CQL library, information for the database connection as well as the name of the library has to be specified on the command line:

```bash
CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
  batch -h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME CQL-LIBRARY-NAME
```

The return value of the process indicates whether the evaluation, or any of multiple evaluations, failed.
With default `--print-*` options (see below), any errors will be printed in addition to being indicated by the return value.
By default, errors but no evaluation results will be printed to the standard output stream of the process.

A "sink" for discarding, visualizing or storing the results computed by CQL expressions can be specified as one option for selecting the respective sink and subsequent sink-dependent options for configuring its behavior, if applicable.
The following sink configurations are supported:

* If no sink is specified, the computed results are not processed further.
  Note that results may still be printed to the standard output stream according to the default printing behavior and the supplied `--print-*` options (see below).

* The sink option(s) `dbwrite [DBWRITE-OPTIONS]` causes the results to be written to an OMOP database.
  Example (final line contains the added options):

  ```bash
  CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    batch -h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME \
    --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-1' --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-2' CQL-LIBRARY-NAME dbwrite
  ```

  This sink writes the objects that are the values of the CQL definitions selected by `RESULT-REGEX-1`, `RESULT-REGEX-2`, etc. into the suitable tables of an OMOP database.
  The database tables are chosen based on the types of the objects.
  The database can be either the same one from which clinical data is retrieved for evaluation or a different OMOP database.

  For example, the command line options `--result-name 'NewPersons' add-persons dbwrite` will evaluate the definitions in the CQL library `add-persons.cql`, look for a definition `NewPersons` in that library and store the value in the `person` OMOP CDM table, assuming the value of the definition is of type `OMOP.v54.Person` (or some other version) or `List<OMOP.v54.Person>`.
  Id fields will be populated when objects are stored in the database, so CQL libraries should not be concerned with those fields.

  The `dbwrite` sink supports the same options as the source database.
  The command `java -jar … batch FakeLibrary dbwrite --help` can be used to display documentation for the sink and its available options.

  See the file `examples/create-patients.cql` for an example CQL library that works with this sink.

* The sink `csv` writes the computed results into multiple CSV files.
  Example (final line contains the added options):

  ```bash
  CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    batch -h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME \
    --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-1' --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-2' CQL-LIBRARY-NAME csv
  ```

  This sink writes the objects that are the values of the CQL definitions selected by `RESULT-REGEX-1`, `RESULT-REGEX-2`, etc. into one or more CSV files.
  The value of each matching expression definition is written to a CSV file that is named like the expression definition.

  For example, the command line options `--result-name 'Population' --result-name 'Intervention' population-and-intervention csv` will evaluate the definitions in the CQL library `population-and-intervention.cql`, look for the definitions `Population` and `Intervention` in that library and store the values in the files `Population.csv` and `Intervention.csv` respectively.

  This sink has a bit of logic for interpreting differently shaped results as columns and row of CSV files.
  Generally, the following rules apply:

  * The elements of a list turn into rows of the CSV file

  * The elements of a tuple turn into columns of a row

  * A "scalar" value turns into a single column of a row

  * The results for different context values (such a `Person` instance) are turned into sequences of rows and concatenated into an overall sequence of rows

  The command `java -jar … batch FakeLibrary csv --help` can be used to display documentation for the sink and its available options.

  See the file `examples/output-csv.cql` for an example CQL library that works with this sink.

* The sink option(s) `histogram [histogram-options]` causes the results for the CQL definitions selected by `RESULT-REGEX-1`, `RESULT-REGEX-2` to be plotted as one or more temporal histograms which are written into one or more image files.
  Example (final line contains the added options):
  ```bash
  CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
    batch -h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME \
    --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-1' --result-name 'RESULT-REGEX-2' CQL-LIBRARY-NAME histogram
  ```

  The computed temporal histograms for matching expression definitions are written to text files that are named like the expression definitions.
  After writing the temporal histograms to text files, call the `gnuplot` program to render the histograms into one or more image files.

  For rendering, the results for multiple definitions can be grouped so that multiple temporal histograms are rendered together into an image file.
  For this grouping, result name are assumed to be named like `<plot>-<series>` where `<plot>` names the plot or image file into which the data should be rendered and `<series>` names the series within the plot or image file as it will appear in the legend.
  Other groupings can be selected with the `--group-by` option of the `histogram` sink.

  For example, the command line options `--result-name 'Output.*' population-and-intervention histogram` will evaluate the definitions in the CQL library `population-and-intervention.cql`, look for the definitions like `Output-Population` and `Output-Intervention` in that library, compute two temporal histograms and store the histograms in the files `Output-Population.txt` and `Output-Intervention.txt`.
  Each selected expression has to evaluate to a CQL value of type `List<Date>`.
  A single plot with the two temporal histograms and a legend with entries `Population` and `Intervention` will be written into the file `Output.png`.

  The command `java -jar … batch FakeLibrary histogram --help` can be used to display documentation for the sink and its available options.

  See the file `examples/output-histogram.cql` for an example CQL library that works with this sink.

Sink options are orthogonal to the printing of evaluation results and/or progress indication and/or errors as the evaluation proceeds.
The following options control the printing of such information during evaluation:

* `--print-results`/`--no-print-results` (default: results are not printed)

  Print each computed result.
  This option is most useful for semi-interactive work and during development and debugging of CQL libraries.
  That said, it is of course possible to additionally select a sink for actual processing of the evaluation results.

* `--print-results-matching=REGEX`

  Print computed results for expressions whose names match the given pattern `REGEX`.
  This option is most useful for semi-interactive work and during development and debugging of CQL libraries.
  That said, it is of course possible to additionally select a sink for actual processing of the evaluation results.

* `--print-errors`/`--no-print-errors` (default: errors are printed)

  Print errors that occur during evaluation.
  Errors during evaluation are printed as soon as they are encountered by default.
  In particular, when a CQL library is evaluated repeatedly, for example for each individual patient, the individual evaluations can succeed or fail so that any number of errors may be printed.
  The (UNIX) return value of the process is not affected by this option.

* `--print-messages`/`--no-print-messages` (default: messages are printed)

  Print warning and note messages that occur during evaluation.
  Messages during evaluation are printed as soon as they are encountered by default.
  In particular, when a CQL library is evaluated repeatedly, for example for each individual patient, the individual evaluations can produce any number of messages.

* `--print-message-counts`/`--no-print-message-counts` (default: message counts are printed)

  After printing the evaluation summary (success, warning and failure counts and elapsed time) also print a breakdown of error, warning, etc. messages by frequency of occurrence.
  This breakdown is intended to help with comparing batch runs and with spotting new or rare messages that are easy to miss in the detailed message output which precedes the summary.

* `--print-progress`/`--no-print-progress` (default: progress indication is not printed)

  Print some indication of progress during evaluation.
  This option is most suitable for long-running evaluations in which the processing of results when printing of results is disabled.

### Terminology Analysis

To analyze the terminology used in one or more CQL libraries, the `terminology` sub-command as well as the names of the libraries have to be specified on the command line:

```bash
CQL_ON_OMOP_DATABASE_PASSWORD=$(GET-PASSWORD) java -jar REPOSITORY-DIRECTORY/target/cql-on-omop-1.1.9-SNAPSHOT.jar \
  terminology [-h DATABASE-SERVER-HOST -p DATABASE-SERVER-PORT -u DATABASE-USERNAME -d DATABASE-NAME] CQL-LIBRARY-NAME
```

The output is a JSON-formatted list of referenced OMOP concepts like the following:

```json
[
  {
    "id": "4062985",
    "name": "Ideal body weight",
    "domain": "Observation",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  {
    "id": "32037",
    "name": "Intensive Care",
    "domain": "Visit",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  {
    "id": "8532",
    "name": "FEMALE",
    "domain": "Gender",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  {
    "id": "3036277",
    "name": "Body height",
    "domain": "Measurement",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  {
    "id": "8507",
    "name": "MALE",
    "domain": "Gender",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  {
    "id": "4099154",
    "name": "Body weight",
    "domain": "Measurement",
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  }
]
```

If no database connection information is provided, the `name` and `domain` fields will be `null` and concept ancestors cannot be looked up:

```json
[
  {
    "id": "4062985",
    "name": null,
    "domain": null,
    "withAncestors": false,
    "usingLibraries": [
      "ExampleLibrary"
    ]
  },
  …
]
```
